docs: add v5 guide (#5674)
fastify/fastify: docs/Guides/Migration-Guide-V5.md

> warnings from v4. All v4 deprecations have been removed and they will no longer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
warnings from v4. All v4 deprecations have been removed and will no longer
```

work after upgrading.

## Long Term Support Cycle

Fastify v5 will only support Node.js v20+. If you are using an older version of
Node.js, you will need to upgrade to a newer version to use Fastify v5.

Fastify v4 is still supported until June 30, 2025. If you are unable to upgrade,

> you can consider buying an end-of-life support plan from HeroDevs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you should consider buying an end-of-life support plan from HeroDevs.
```

### Why Node.js v20?

Fastify v5 will only support Node.js v20+ because it has significant differences
compared to v18, such as
better support for `node:test`. This allows us to provide a better developer
experience and streamline maintenance.

Node.js v18 will exit Long Term Support on April 30, 2025, so you should be planning
to upgrade to v20 anyway.

## Breaking Changes

### Full JSON Schema is now required for `querystring`, `params` and `body` and response schemas

Starting with v5, Fastify will require a full JSON schema for the `querystring`
schema. Note that the `jsonShortHand` option has been removed as well.

> If the detault JSON Schema validator is used, you will need

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the default JSON Schema validator is used, you will need
```

to provide a full JSON schema for the
`querystring`, `params`, `body`, and `response` schemas,
including the `type` property.

```js
// v4
fastify.get('/route', {
  schema: {
    querystring: {
      name: { type: 'string' }
    }
  }
}, (req, reply) => {
  reply.send({ hello: req.query.name });
});
```

```js
// v5
fastify.get('/route', {
  schema: {
    querystring: {
      type: 'object',
      properties: {
        name: { type: 'string' }
      },
      required: ['name']
    }
  }
}, (req, reply) => {
  reply.send({ hello: req.query.name });
});
```

See [#5586](https://github.com/fastify/fastify/pull/5586) for more details

Note that it's still possible to override the JSON Schema validator to

> use a different format, such as Zod. This change simplify that as well.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
use a different format, such as Zod. This change simplifies that as well.
```

This change helps with integration of other tools, such as
[`@fastify/swagger`](https://github.com/fastify/fastify-swagger).

### New logger constructor signature

In Fastify v4, Fastify accepted the options to build a pino
logger in the `logger` option, as well as a custom logger instance.
This was the source of significant confusion.

> As a result, the `logger` option will not accept a custom logger anymore in in v5.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As a result, the `logger` option will not accept a custom logger anymore in v5.
```

> to use a custom logger, you should use the `loggerInstance` option instead:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To use a custom logger, you should use the `loggerInstance` option instead:
```

If you still wish to use semicolons as delimiters, you can do so by
setting `useSemicolonDelimiter: true` in the server configuration.

```js
const fastify = require('fastify')({
  useSemicolonDelimiter: true
});
```

> ### The parameters object does no longer have a prototype

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### The parameters object no longer has a prototype
```

In v4, the `parameters` object had a prototype. This is no longer the case in v5.
This means that you can no longer access properties inherited from `Object` on the `parameters` object,
such as `toString` or `hasOwnProperty`.

```js
// v4
fastify.get('/route', (req, reply) => {
  console.log(req.params.hasOwnProperty('name'));
  return { hello: req.params.name };
});
```

```js
// v5
fastify.get('/route', (req, reply) => {

>   console.log(Object.prototype.hasOwnProperty.call(req.params, 'name'));

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  console.log(Object.hasOwn(req.params, 'name'));
```

  return { hello: req.params.name };
});
```

> This increase the security of the application by hardening against prototype pollution attacks.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This increases the security of the application by hardening against prototype pollution attacks.
```

In v5, the type providers have been split into two separate types: `ValidatorSchema` and `SerializerSchema`.

[`@fastify/type-provider-json-schema-to-ts`](https://github.com/fastify/fastify-type-provider-json-schema-to-ts)
and
[`@fastify/type-provider-typebox`](https://github.com/fastify/fastify-type-provider-typebox)
have already been updated: upgrade to the latest version to get the new types.
If you are using a custom type provider, you will need to modify it like
the following:

```
--- a/index.ts
+++ b/index.ts
@@ -11,7 +11,8 @@ import {
 import { FromSchema, FromSchemaDefaultOptions, FromSchemaOptions, JSONSchema } from 'json-schema-to-ts'
 
 export interface JsonSchemaToTsProvider<Options extends FromSchemaOptions = FromSchemaDefaultOptions> extends FastifyTypeProvider {
-  output: this['input'] extends JSONSchema ? FromSchema<this['input'], Options> : unknown;
+  validator: this['schema'] extends JSONSchema ? FromSchema<this['schema'], Options> : unknown;
+  serializer: this['schema'] extends JSONSchema ? FromSchema<this['schema'], Options> : unknown;
 }
 ```

### Changes to the .listen() method

> The have removed the variable argument signature from the `.listen()` method. This means that you can no longer call `.listen()` with a variable number of arguments.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The variadic argument signature of the `.listen()` method has been removed. This means that you can no longer call `.listen()` with a variable number of arguments.
```

  reply.sent = true;
  reply.raw.end('hello');
});
```

Change it to:

```js
// v5
fastify.get('/route', (req, reply) => {
  reply.hijack();
  reply.raw.end('hello');
});
```

This was already deprecated in v4 as `FSTDEP010`, so you should have already updated your code to use the new signature.

### Constraints for route versioning signature changes

We changed the signature for route versioning constraints. The `version` and `versioning` options have been removed and you should use the `constraints` option instead.

| Code | Description | How to solve | Discussion |
| ---- | ----------- | ------------ | ---------- |
| FSTDEP008 | You are using route constraints via the route `{version: "..."}` option.  |  Use `{constraints: {version: "..."}}` option.  | [#2682](https://github.com/fastify/fastify/pull/2682) |
| FSTDEP009 | You are using a custom route versioning strategy via the server `{versioning: "..."}` option. |  Use `{constraints: {version: "..."}}` option.  | [#2682](https://github.com/fastify/fastify/pull/2682) |

### `exposeHeadRoutes: false` is now required to disable automatic `HEAD` routes

Fastify automatically registers a `HEAD` route for every `GET` route.

> You know must explicitly set `exposeHeadRoutes` to `false`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You now must explicitly set `exposeHeadRoutes` to `false`.
```

### `reply.getResponseTime()` has been removed, use `reply.elapsedTime` instead

The `reply.getResponseTime()` method has been removed in v5.
You should use `reply.elapsedTime` instead.

```js
// v4
fastify.get('/route', (req, reply) => {
  console.log(reply.getResponseTime());
  return { hello: 'world' };
});
```

```js
// v5
fastify.get('/route', (req, reply) => {
  console.log(reply.elapsedTime);
  return { hello: 'world' };
});
```

This was already deprecated in v4 as `FSTDEP20`, so you should have already
updated your code to use the new signature.

### `fastify.hasRoute()` now matches the behavior of `find-my-way`

The `fastify.hasRoute()` method now matches the behavior of `find-my-way`
and requires the route definition to be passed as it is defined in the route.

```js
// v4
fastify.get('/example/:file(^\\d+).png', function (request, reply) { })

console.log(fastify.hasRoute({
  method: 'GET', 
  url: '/example/12345.png'
)); // true
```

```js
// v5

fastify.get('/example/:file(^\\d+).png', function (request, reply) { })

console.log(fastify.hasRoute({
  method: 'GET', 
  url: '/example/:file(^\\d+).png'
)); // true
```

> ### Removal of some unused HTTP methods

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Removal of some non-standard HTTP methods
```

We have removed the following HTTP methods from Fastify:
- `PROPFIND`
- `PROPPATCH`
- `MKCOL`
- `COPY`
- `MOVE`
- `LOCK`
- `UNLOCK`
- `TRACE`
- `SEARCH`

> It's now possible to add them back using the `addHook` method.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
It's now possible to add them back using the `acceptHTTPMethod` method.
```

```js
const fastify = Fastify()

// add a new http method on top of the defaul ones:
fastify.acceptHTTPMethod('REBIND')

// add a new HTTP method that accepts a body:
fastify.acceptHTTPMethod('REBIND', { hasBody: true })

// reads the HTTP methods list:
fastify.supportedMethods // returns a string array
```

See [#5567](https://github.com/fastify/fastify/pull/5567) for more
information.

### Removed support from reference types in decorators

Decorating Request/Reply with a reference type (`Array`, `Object`)
is now prohibited as this reference is shared amongst all requests.

```js
// v4
fastify.decorateRequest('myObject', { hello: 'world' });
```

```js
// v5
fastify.decorateRequest('myObject');
fastify.addHook('onRequest', async (req, reply) => {
  req.myObject = { hello: 'world' };
});
```

or turn into a function

```js
// v5
fastify.decorateRequest('myObject', () => { hello: 'world' });

> ```

Reviewer 4: May want to show the `getter` possibility.

See [#5462](https://github.com/fastify/fastify/pull/5462) for more information.

### Remove support for DELETE with a `Content-Type: application/json` header and an empty body

In v4, Fastify allowed `DELETE` requests with a `Content-Type: application/json`
header and an empty body was accepted.
This is no longer allowed in v5.

See [#5419](https://github.com/fastify/fastify/pull/5419) for more information.

### Plugins cannot mix callback/promise API anymore

In v4, plugins could mix the callback and promise API, leading to unexpected behavior.
This is no longer allowed in v5.

```js
// v4
fastify.register(async function (instance, opts, done) {
  done();
});
```

```js
// v5
fastify.register(async function (instance, opts) {
  return;
});
```

or

```js
// v5
fastify.register(async function (instance, opts, done) {
  done();
});

> ```

Reviewer 4: Isn't this the form being removed?

If you still wish to use semicolons as delimiters, you can do so by
setting `useSemicolonDelimiter: true` in the server configuration.

```js
const fastify = require('fastify')({
  useSemicolonDelimiter: true
});
```

### The parameters object no longer has a prototype

In v4, the `parameters` object had a prototype. This is no longer the case in v5.
This means that you can no longer access properties inherited from `Object` on
the `parameters` object, such as `toString` or `hasOwnProperty`.

```js
// v4

> fastify.get('/route', (req, reply) => {

Reviewer 3: shall this example actually include a route param? e.g.

```suggestion
fastify.get('/route/:name', (req, reply) => {
```

>   console.log(req.params.hasOwnProperty('name'));

Reviewer 3: might be worth showing what this will print, e.g.

```suggestion
  console.log(req.params.hasOwnProperty('name')); // true
```

  return { hello: req.params.name };
});
```

```js
// v5

> fastify.get('/route', (req, reply) => {

Reviewer 3: and here as well

>   console.log(Object.hasOwn(req.params, 'name'));

Reviewer 3: similarly 
```suggestion
  console.log(Object.hasOwn(req.params, 'name')); // true
```

-  output: this['input'] extends JSONSchema ? FromSchema<this['input'], Options> : unknown;
+  validator: this['schema'] extends JSONSchema ? FromSchema<this['schema'], Options> : unknown;
+  serializer: this['schema'] extends JSONSchema ? FromSchema<this['schema'], Options> : unknown;
 }
 ```

### Changes to the .listen() method

The variadic argument signature of the `.listen()` method has been removed.
This means that you can no longer call `.listen()` with a variable number of arguments.

```js
// v4
fastify.listen(8000)
```

Will become:

```js
// v5
fastify.listen({ port: 8000 })
```

This was already deprecated in v4 as `FSTDEP011`, so you should have already updated
your code to use the new signature.

### Direct return of trailers has been removed

In v4, you could directly return trailers from a handler.
This is no longer possible in v5.

```js
// v4
fastify.get('/route', (req, reply) => {
  reply.trailer('ETag', function (reply, payload) {
    return 'custom-etag'
  })
  reply.send('')
});
```

```js
// v5
fastify.get('/route', (req, reply) => {
  reply.trailer('ETag', async function (reply, payload) {
    return 'custom-etag'
  })
  reply.send('')

> });

Reviewer 3: I'm not very familiar with this feature but I can't spot real differences in the two snippets here, apart from the callback function of .trailer being async in the v5 version

Author: That's the change.

Reviewer 5: It changes from a accepting function return to `async-await` or `callback` styles.
The example is showing the change from `function` to `async function`.

I agree that the example may not be very clear. But that is the reality of the change.
Will it be more clear if we also add the `callback` style?
```js
fastify.get('/route', (req, reply) => {
  reply.trailer('ETag', async function (reply, payload, done) {
    done('custom-etag')
  })
  reply.send('')
});
```

```

A callback could also be used.
This was already deprecated in v4 as `FSTDEP013`,
so you should have already updated your code to use the new signature.

### Streamlined access to route definition

> Remove all deprecation that related to accessing the route definition

Reviewer: This line doesn't read well but I can't think of a nicer way to write it.

`All deprecated properties relating to accessing the route definition have been removed`?

Author: Maybe we should list the properties being removed?

Reviewer: They're being listed in the table below this line.

Author: Done

being sent.
This is no longer possible in v5, use `reply.hijack()` instead.

```js
// v4
fastify.get('/route', (req, reply) => {
  reply.sent = true;
  reply.raw.end('hello');
});
```

Change it to:

```js
// v5
fastify.get('/route', (req, reply) => {
  reply.hijack();
  reply.raw.end('hello');
});
```

This was already deprecated in v4 as `FSTDEP010`, so you should have already
updated your code to use the new signature.

### Constraints for route versioning signature changes

We changed the signature for route versioning constraints.
The `version` and `versioning` options have been removed and you should
use the `constraints` option instead.

| Code | Description | How to solve | Discussion |
| ---- | ----------- | ------------ | ---------- |
| FSTDEP008 | You are using route constraints via the route `{version: "..."}` option.  |  Use `{constraints: {version: "..."}}` option.  | [#2682](https://github.com/fastify/fastify/pull/2682) |
| FSTDEP009 | You are using a custom route versioning strategy via the server `{versioning: "..."}` option. |  Use `{constraints: {version: "..."}}` option.  | [#2682](https://github.com/fastify/fastify/pull/2682) |

> ### `exposeHeadRoutes: false` is now required to disable automatic `HEAD` routes

Reviewer 5: I think it is wrong. You can either
1. Disable `exposeHeadRoutes`
2. Define the `HEAD` route before `GET` when `exposeHeadRoutes` is enabled.

```markdown
### `HEAD` routes requires to register before `GET` when `exposeHeadRoutes: true`

We have a more strict requirement for custom `HEAD` route when `exposeHeadRoutes: true`.

You must either explicitly set `exposeHeadRoutes` to `false`

```js
// v4
fastify.get('/route', {

}, (req, reply) => {
  reply.send({ hello: 'world' });
});

fastify.head('/route', (req, reply) => {
  // ...
});
```

```js
// v5
fastify.get('/route', {
  exposeHeadRoutes: false
}, (req, reply) => {
  reply.send({ hello: 'world' });
});

fastify.head('/route', (req, reply) => {
  // ...
});
```

or place the `HEAD` route before `GET`.

```js
// v5
fastify.head('/route', (req, reply) => {
  // ...
});

fastify.get('/route', {

}, (req, reply) => {
  reply.send({ hello: 'world' });
});
```

This was changed in [#2700](https://github.com/fastify/fastify/pull/2700),
and the old behavior was deprecated in v4 as `FSTDEP007`.
```

Author: Thanks, changed.

  return { hello: 'world' };
});
```

```js
// v5
fastify.get('/route', (req, reply) => {
  console.log(reply.elapsedTime);
  return { hello: 'world' };
});
```

This was already deprecated in v4 as `FSTDEP20`, so you should have already
updated your code to use the new signature.

### `fastify.hasRoute()` now matches the behavior of `find-my-way`

The `fastify.hasRoute()` method now matches the behavior of `find-my-way`
and requires the route definition to be passed as it is defined in the route.

```js
// v4
fastify.get('/example/:file(^\\d+).png', function (request, reply) { })

console.log(fastify.hasRoute({
  method: 'GET', 
  url: '/example/12345.png'
)); // true
```

```js
// v5

fastify.get('/example/:file(^\\d+).png', function (request, reply) { })

console.log(fastify.hasRoute({
  method: 'GET', 
  url: '/example/:file(^\\d+).png'
)); // true
```
### Removal of some non-standard HTTP methods

We have removed the following HTTP methods from Fastify:
- `PROPFIND`
- `PROPPATCH`
- `MKCOL`
- `COPY`
- `MOVE`
- `LOCK`
- `UNLOCK`
- `TRACE`
- `SEARCH`

It's now possible to add them back using the `acceptHTTPMethod` method.

```js
const fastify = Fastify()

> // add a new http method on top of the defaul ones:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// add a new http method on top of the default ones:
```

fastify.acceptHTTPMethod('REBIND')

// add a new HTTP method that accepts a body:
fastify.acceptHTTPMethod('REBIND', { hasBody: true })

// reads the HTTP methods list:
fastify.supportedMethods // returns a string array
```

See [#5567](https://github.com/fastify/fastify/pull/5567) for more
information.

### Removed support from reference types in decorators

Decorating Request/Reply with a reference type (`Array`, `Object`)
is now prohibited as this reference is shared amongst all requests.

```js
// v4
fastify.decorateRequest('myObject', { hello: 'world' });
```

```js
// v5
fastify.decorateRequest('myObject');
fastify.addHook('onRequest', async (req, reply) => {
  req.myObject = { hello: 'world' };
});
```

> or turn into a function

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
or turn it into a function
```

+  serializer: this['schema'] extends JSONSchema ? FromSchema<this['schema'], Options> : unknown;
 }
 ```

### Changes to the .listen() method

The variadic argument signature of the `.listen()` method has been removed.
This means that you can no longer call `.listen()` with a variable number of arguments.

```js
// v4
fastify.listen(8000)
```

Will become:

```js
// v5
fastify.listen({ port: 8000 })
```

This was already deprecated in v4 as `FSTDEP011`, so you should have already updated
your code to use the new signature.

### Direct return of trailers has been removed

In v4, you could directly return trailers from a handler.
This is no longer possible in v5.

```js
// v4
fastify.get('/route', (req, reply) => {
  reply.trailer('ETag', function (reply, payload) {
    return 'custom-etag'
  })
  reply.send('')
});
```

```js
// v5
fastify.get('/route', (req, reply) => {
  reply.trailer('ETag', async function (reply, payload) {
    return 'custom-etag'
  })
  reply.send('')
});
```

A callback could also be used.
This was already deprecated in v4 as `FSTDEP013`,
so you should have already updated your code to use the new signature.

### Streamlined access to route definition

> All deprecated properties relating to accessing the route definition have been removed
> It can now be accessed via `request.routeOptions`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All deprecated properties relating to accessing the route definition have been removed
and are now accessed via `request.routeOptions`.
```
